---
layout: post
title: Banks can't afford to stay still
---

Since I've decided to leave academia pretty soon, I've been trying to get an idea of what's available.
Mostly I've been interested in IT consulting, but I've tried to stay open-minded and get a broad snapshot of the job market,
even if the employer doesn't strictly correspond to my field.
Consequentially, the other day I found myself in an event held by an investment bank, where several of their employees
described their typical day at work.

A senior analyst gave a talk where he shed some light on their scenario modeling methodology. I found the topic interesting and had a few
words with him after the event. I asked whether they were interested in data mining, for example digging social media through
[Facebook](https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/) or [Twitter](https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs) APIs to give perspective on
events in real time, or replacing some of the outdated statistical methodology with more data-driven machine learning based alternatives.
Alas, my questions were met with a condescending smile and something along the lines of "I don't think you can use those kinds of things
as basis for an investment decision".

Suit yourself, Mr. Analyst. I understand that banks are conservative in several ways, however I wonder if they can afford it.
The results don't seem to suggest that: While the said bank specializes in fund management, its returns are modest.
Their top performer beats the corresponding index by approximately ten percentage points of cumulative difference over the last five
years even when you account for the rather audacious fees. That's pretty impressive.
However, none of their
other funds produce practically any advantage over their corresponding indexes. When the fees are included, most of them perform worse.
In plain English: *The results produced by a bank with tens of millions in revenue are mostly worse than doing nothing.*
Isn't that shocking? All the effort they put into analyzing companies and producing different scenarios, then, at the end of the day it was all for nothing except for that
one outstanding fund. The numbers scream "we need ideas", don't they? Well, it's only going to get worse in the future.

Active trading carries an implicit assumption of advantage over the average investor; how this advantage is gained is the million
dollar question. As a further complication, under the assumption of reasonably
[efficient markets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Efficient-market_hypothesis), any advantage only lasts as long as the others are unaware
of it. I'm willing to bet that any fresh advantage won't be achieved by classical methods, but algorithmic trading.

In many ways investing is not a even game for humans in the first place. Programs are **scalable**, we are not. It's cheap to buy
more computing power to analyze more data, but it quickly gets infeasible to hire enough people to do the same work.
We are also far from **perfectly objective**.
It's no secret that [our many biases](http://www.europeanfinancialreview.com/?p=512) easily cripple our portfolios and seduce us into taking exceedingly high risks.

While it's true that, in a way, the algorithm is only as smart as its designer, the machines are gaining ground fast:
Before [AlphaGo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaGo) for example,
it was thought that humans were still long ahead computers in the game of Go.
Even if the algorithms won't replace humans completely anytime soon, they will be used in increasingly
complicated tasks, previously only humans could tackle.

## An example: The Altera acquisition news 

An extreme example of scale advantage
of an algorithm over a human trader can be recalled from a few years ago.
On a 2015 March afternoon on Dow Jones Newswires news surfaced that the multinational chip maker Intel was in talks to buy
another publicly traded hardware company Altera, but there was no official announcement at the moment.
According to Nasdaq data, Altera's stock was halted on the merger news less than 20 seconds later and two seconds after that
[a reporter tweeted the news](https://twitter.com/DanaMattioli/status/581539428331466752?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw&ref_url=http%3A%2F%2Ffortune.com%2F2015%2F04%2F01%2F2-4-million-off-a-tweet%2F).
Before the news broke Altera's stock was trading at 34 dollars and the news boosted its price to around 44.5 dollars.

So there were 20 seconds between the first rumors and the official announcement, a moment too brief for a human to take advantage of,
even if they happened to see the first piece of information precisely at the right time. However, during those seconds, something
[turned 100k into 2.4 million](http://fortune.com/2015/04/01/2-4-million-off-a-tweet/).

*Within a second*
a trader bought [options](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_option) with a strike price of 36 dollars (the stock was 34 dollars at the 
moment) that were worth very little, 35 cents. However, when the stock jumped to 44.5 the options were suddenly worth roughly
44.5-36=8.5 dollars yielding whopping **2300%** in profit. Assuming there was
[nothing shady](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insider_trading) going on, the only reasonable explanation is that the news triggered a
trading algorithm that proceeded to buy.

## Survival of the fittest

While banks also face [other challenges](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Payment_Services_Directive) in near future,
the increasing importance of quantitative approaches is a major one.
[Quant funds are not new](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-21/how-renaissance-s-medallion-fund-became-finance-s-blackest-box).
However, new methods enable new forms of advantage. The renaissance of the neural networks inspired by the
success of LeCun's convolutional neural networks in [the ImageNet 2012 challenge](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks)
has demonstrated that the power of nonlinear high-dimensional regression methods often exceeds the previous benchmarks.
I would be amazed to find out that there wouldn't be numerous ways these methods couldn't set new benchmarks in finance too.

The clock is ticking and the shrinking advantage is being harvested all the time. Those who keep up will get their share, others are better off sticking to the index.
Given all this, I keep wondering, can any active fund *really* afford to not start taking technological progress seriously.
