---
layout: post
title: Scala seems pretty awesome
---

Turns out there is a [Wikipedia category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Criticisms_of_programming_languages)
called _Criticisms of programming languages_ with three entries: JavaScript, C++ and Java. Not a very surprising trio,
you should read Linus Torvald's [funny rant](http://harmful.cat-v.org/software/c++/linus) about C++; personally, I've heard Java
especially getting a lot of hate. Before a few days ago, all I knew about Scala was that it's "Java done right", but that didn't
seem like a strong enough incentive for me to learn another language. I got into it because Scala seems to be the preferred language
for using [Spark](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Spark).

I did [this tutorial](https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/scala/) and, based on this limited experience, I'm pretty excited about
Scala. On the first glance, the syntax seems a little peculiar, e.g.
{% highlight scala %}
val sq: Int => Int = x => x*x
{% endhighlight %}
defines the formula $\mathrm{sq}(x) = x^2$, but it's actually pleasing for someone with a math background. The above
statement, for example, basically reads
<center>
$$
\mathrm{sq}: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}, \quad x \mapsto x^2.
$$
</center>

When I first got into Python, I didn't like the dynamic typing
and even after a few years of writing mostly Python, Scala's static typing feels nice and solid to work with.
There is type inference, so you don't have to repeat things like `Int` all the time:
{% highlight scala %}
// This
val x = 3

// is the same as this
val x: Int = 3
{% endhighlight %}
## A combination of functional and object-oriented styles
Scala isn't a purely functional language. In my opinion this isn't a bad thing since some purely functional languages, like
Haskell, are so strict about side-effects and statelessness that it's hard to see how they would be convenient to work with
in some real-life situations. 
You can define immutable values with
`val`, but you also have `var` to declare values that can change:
{% highlight scala %}
val x = 3
x = 2 // ERROR

var y = 3
y = 2 // Executes just fine
{% endhighlight %}

Scala can be quite concise:
{% highlight scala %}
// Calculate and print 1!, 2!,..., 10!
val factorial = (x: Int) => 1 to x reduce (_*_)
1 to 10 map factorial foreach println
{% endhighlight %}
I was also impressed by the powerful pattern matching that's really flexible in combining intrinsically quite different conditions
such as conditional expressions on different types:
{% highlight scala %}
// A RegEx for matching an email address
val email = "(.*)@(.*)".r

def matchEverything(obj: Any): String = obj match {
  case email(name, domain) => s"Got email address $name@$domain"

  case x: Double => s"Got the following double: $x"

  case x: Int if x > 1000 => "Got a pretty big number."

  case _ => "Got unknown object"
}

{% endhighlight %}

In addition to the stuff you see in any object-oriented context like inheritance, object methods and attributes, the object-oriented
side of Scala has some special quirks. In addition to "classes" and "objects" there are "case classes" and "traits". The difference
between "classes" and "case classes" seems to be mostly a matter of style as the line is a bit fuzzy, but "traits" correspond quite
directly to "interfaces" familiar from Java.

It seems that the object-oriented side of Scala takes some time to learn, as [this book](https://www.manning.com/books/scala-in-depth),
for example, shows that the intricacies of the system run quite deep. So far I haven't had the chance to study this in depth,
but I hope to fix that soonish.

## Towards Spark

Getting my hands on Google's
[MapReduce paper](https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//archive/mapreduce-osdi04.pdf) 
was my first effort to get to know some big-data technologies. Then, after comparing Hadoop and Spark, I decided to
start heading towards the latter. I found
[some instructions](https://medium.com/@josemarcialportilla/installing-scala-and-spark-on-ubuntu-5665ee4b62b1)
for getting Spark up and running and wrote my first few lines to the console.

I thought I'd spend some more time with plain Scala, until I'm comfortable enough with it to avoid constantly fumbling
with the basics. Then I'll probably get my hands dirty with Spark by simulating a cluster locally on my laptop.
I might even have some real-life use for this stuff quite soon as there is a potential work project that
includes working with very large datasets that may require distributed databases.
